---
id: 1
title: "'Median Income' is misleading"
subtitle: "Medians are misleading in general, too"
date: "2023.08.01"
tags: "stats, anti-narrative, money, society"
---

In a similar vein to my last post, I'm going to cover another somewhat-misleading U.S. statistic: median income.

Recently, it's become quite the fad (on Twitter and Instagram at least) to talk about where you stand in terms of income in relation to others.

Maybe you've seen those posts where an uninformed woman waltzes onto the set of a podcast (or [youtube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RZ2j3uSHOk)) stating they want a man who makes six figures, before the host informs them smartly that only the "top 10%" of men make that much, and most men never make that much.

On paper... that's true! The median income was merely 37k in 2021[^1].

Clearly, there's not enough of these men to go around, since there's only a 9:1 ratio of men making six-figures, let alone at the age of 30 or younger! Their standards are unrealistic.

Nah, I disagree. This is a terrible analysis overall.

I don't want this article to become another cited article in this argument (since I have *no interest in that whatsoever*). 

But I do want to make a point about misleading statistics, and I wanted to give some context for why this matters. I think the narratives created by these videos are harmful, whether you happen to agree with them or not.

But without further ado:

# What is the median income, really?

Let's be clear: median income is only a useful statistic if you really care about *everyone* in general.

But... do we care about everyone in this case? That sounds bad, but what I really mean is that we care *only about male income*, and of male income, presumably *we only care about those that are working currently*. 

And what do you know: the 37k number not only includes women and men, but also *women and men who are not working*, and *people under the age of 18*.

In fact, it counts *anyone* over the age of 15![^1] Can you imagine if 50% of working adults made less than 37k *in this economy*? I'm not sure it could function.

So, the *real* numbers for full-time workers come out to ~61k a year for men, and ~51k a year for women.[^3] Still a far cry from 100k, but certainly not the same distance as 37k. Even restricting to the 25 to 34 year age range, the median man makes ~54k per year. 

So, excluding (most) students and all minors makes a huge difference. Of course, this excludes part-time workers, but frankly in this economy there are plenty of open full-time jobs (and most people working part-time are students or have another income to support them, anyway).

# Ok, and what about location?

This is the *other* pitfall of median income.

Unfortunately, I'm not able to provide median incomes for full-time workers *by state*. I'm not sure these stats exist.

However, I can show you that there is a huge disparity on median incomes for households by state. The range goes from a paltry $57k for households headed by someone age 45-64 (in Mississippi), all the way to $110,664 in Maryland.[^3] The national median is around 70k, for reference.

So, if you live in a more wealthy (and likely, costlier) state or city, 100k is probably not too unrealistic! Anyone from SF or NYC could tell you that 100k is not uncommon at all, for example.

In fact, I bet this is the source of a lot of outrage online. 100k sounds like a lot to someone in the midwest, but it's barely middle class (or hell, in a decade arguably lower-class) in SF or NYC.

But wait... there's more!

# Income varies heavily by education, too

I was debating whether to keep this in, since it doesn't show that the median income statistics are misleading at all, but I think it's important to keep in mind for why expectations of income seem so disparate.

So. The median male income for high school dropouts is $29,775, and $39,953 for high school graduates. Also, 47k for college dropouts.

The median male income for college graduates, however, is 69k. For a Master's? 89k. A professional degree or doctorate nets 124k and 120k respectively[^3].

For all full-time workers with a bachelor's degree or higher (not just men), it's 80k[^2]. Crazy, huh? If you further take into account location... I wouldn't be surprised if the median for college graduates working in SF or NYC was 100k or right near it, to be honest.

# The Takeaway

National medians suck. The U.S. is basically 6 different countries in one depending on the region you live in. The Northeast is significantly richer than the midwest, and even within those states, the lives of many college graduates is entirely foreign to those of high school and college dropouts.

The current obsession with percentiles and seeing where you weigh up (or berating others for their "unrealistic" standards) also sucks.

For the first part, it matters a hell of a lot more where you started and where you ended up than raw percentile. Someone born into poverty who manages to live an honest life making 60k a year is a hell of a lot more impressive to me than someone born to parents making 200k who ends up making 400k. We all have our own struggles, and frankly I don't think measuring ourselves like this helps.

For the second part, standards depend so much on who you are. 

Obviously, having a standard that someone should be a millionaire at minimum to date you is ridiculous if you're broke. But if your last name is Kardashian? Frankly, I'm surprised your standards are so forgiving.

Anyway, context matters in social science. None of these statistics should be taken at face value; use your real life experience and intuition to inform how much they apply to your real life. 

For example, imagine telling someone in NYC that they should be grateful they make $20 an hour because that's so much higher than the national median! They would be right to say you have no idea what you're talking about.

Until next time.

[^1]: [US Census Bureau](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MEPAINUSA672N)
[^2]: [Bureau of Labor Statistics. Assumed most workers report yearly income or an accurate weekly/monthly income, since the BLS reports average weekly income. See paper for details.](https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/wkyeng.pdf)
[^3]: [Forbes, data from incomebyzipcode.com. Misreported as average incomes instead of median.]()
