---
id: 2
title: "Speculation"
subtitle: ""
date: "2023.09.17"
tags: "philosophy, badreasoning"
---

## Roots of Speculation

Before the birth of modern philosophy[^1], two camps of philosophers occupied most academic discussion.

The orthodox view[^2] stemmed from *rationalists*: believers in at least one category of *a priori* knowledge, or knowledge prior to outer experience (i.e., knowledge derived from the senses). An example of such knowledge might lie in the field of mathematics: rationalists would say mathematics is derived *a priori* without any necessary reference to our senses, arising only from the structure of our brain or the soul, or from some higher power.

Many well-known arguments in philosophy hang on this belief: Descarte's famous principle "*cogito ergo sum*"[^3], Leibniz's monadism, and Spinoza's pantheistic arguments for the existence of God are all considered rationalist staples.

Other proto-rationalists, such as Aquinas, argued for the existence of God following basic logical principles (formulating what is now known as the Cosmological argument). One could also consider the first 'canonical' philosopher, Plato, to be a rationalist due to his belief in the Forms, or non-physical and timeless entities from which we can derive knowledge.

The other camp, empiricists, denied that there were any categories of *a priori* knowledge. All knowledge must stem from *a posteriori* reasoning, or reasoning that can begin only after being given sense data. 

An obvious form of *a posteriori* knowledge would be all scientific knowledge: the scientific method hinges entirely on observing data derived from our experience. One could not and does not intuit gravitational mechanics without first observing its effects in the real world, nor does one derive the chemical structure of water without some form of sense data.

Classic examples of empiricists would be George Berkeley and David Hume[^4], although Hume would be considered the most 'pure' empiricist,
being totally skeptical of any and all *a priori* claims. This even extended to our basic belief in causality, or the belief that each 'effect' has a cause. For example, hitting a cueball with a cue *causes* it to start moving, which might then cause it to hit another ball, causing that ball to start moving, eventually settling in place.

Hume argued that our belief in causality, though seemingly correct, was still contingent only on an assumption from our prior experiences. We could never be totally sure that causality would continue to hold true, nor can we be sure that causality has held before our own existence. We can't be totally sure of anything at all, really -- without *a priori* truths, every 'truth' we have come to accept is only contingently true with some high probability.

Naturally, this stance poses a deep problem for philosophy. The famous arguments listed above are all jeopardized by the empirical, skeptical view of the world. It poses a particular conundrum for religion: earlier philosophers had defended arguments for the soul, God, and objective morality using their belief in *a priori* knowledge, but Hume's stance completely invalidated these arguments. For example, Hume's believe in the contingency of causality jeopardizes Aquinas' cosmological argument, which assumes that all causes must have an effect (eventually concluding that God must be the "first cause"). Arguments for the existence of the soul or for the existence of moral truths typically fell apart under similar scrutiny.

Hume's arguments were so corrosive to philosophy that it may as well have invalidated ~all prior philosophy. If basic logic and math could not be relied on to provide answers to these questions, then philosophy itself goes in a wash of smoke.

## "Saving Philosophy"

In the late 1700s, little-known Immanuel Kant[^5] set out on a quest to incorporate Hume's views into philosophy while keeping the aim intact. Kant argued that both camps were right in some way; to the rationalists' credit, some categories of *a priori* reasoning were capable of providing truth.

To give a very brief and heavily abridged version of Kant's views, he believed the very structure of our mind revolved around pure "intuitions" of space and time. That is, we cannot help but think in terms of space and time when it concerns objects or logical structures.

Space and time as we know them do not exist outside of our own experience, or rather we necessarily cannot *know* if they exist outside of our own experience (because of course we can't -- everything is filtered through our own experience). 

From these combination of these intuitions arise 'appearances', or 'objects of experience', formed by the combination of our perception and understanding allowing us to intuit raw sense data as a singular object or set of objects.[^6]

From these intuitions arise certain pure categories of understanding ('categories') -- or concepts that we cannot help but apply to our experience, and which apply absolutely to our own experience. 

Kant's justification for their validity and experience is complex, but suffice to say that Kant believed certain concepts were totally and absolutely true as they applied to our experience. Causality qualifies as one of these categories; since time itself is vital and necessary to our experience, we cannot help but define causal relations within space and time as we see appearances ordered in this way.[^7]

Though Kant spends much time in the Critique defending rationalist sentiment, he spends the last part of the book critiquing many orthodox views held by rationalists. Kant demonstrates how it is possible to expound equally sound arguments for and against the existence of God, the Soul, and free will by using pure reason (i.e., reasoning without any empirical sense data to accompany it). 

He further explains that reason without this sense data is a form of *illusion* --  we as humans are extremely susceptible to this type of reasoning, and it has infected philosophy since its inception.[^8] 

It is extremely easy to fall into the trap of speculating and arguing for a certain position without much data to go off of, instead reasoning yourself into the completely wrong direction based on *a priori* axioms that later turn out to be completely incorrect. As the expression goes, arguing how many angels can dance on a pin is a waste of time. It could go either way.

## What does this have to do with speculation?

Speculation, especially as it pertains to the far future (i.e. more than maybe a couple of years), is a corrosive force that relies largely on *a priori* reasoning and very little on empirical data.

Today's rationalists make the same mistake as the old rationalists. Not because they speculate about the soul, but rather because their logical reasoning ends up applying to no object at all, only applying to vapor existing only in their own mind. Logical elegancy is valued far above what it should -- when in reality we should be very skeptical of our ability to predict future events given past track records.

I find myself falling into this trap as well. It's nearly impossible to predict the future. Experts are famously often wrong[^9] on the timelines of certain technologies coming to fruition, and oftentimes the reasoning for these timelines are rather shoddy. I can't blame them much -- it is hard to predict accurately what will new developments happen in the next year[^10], let alone in the next few decades. People cite sci-fi authors as visionaires, but oftentimes their timelines are also completely wrong, even if the technology is correct.[^11]

Yet still, we fall to this illusion. We cannot help but speculate. But I feel like we take these inane speculations *way too seriously*, even when past evidence shows the assumptions behind these predictions to be laughably wrong.[^12] It doesn't matter how nice or logically sound your arguments are if you end up being completely wrong or only directionally correct much of the time.[^13]

Hence why I believe "engaging with arguments" that provide little-to-no empirical basis for their claims is largely a waste of time. Perhaps my priors and axiomatic beliefs differ from yours, or I interpret your very vague chart of technological progress differently than you. It doesn't matter. Speculation is largely a waste of time, unless you speculate that we don't know very much and should therefore proceed with caution. But emenating an air of authority because you 'thought a lot' about a certain topic, without much to show in terms of real world prediction accuracy, is an error we were supposed to have grown past over two hundred years ago. 


[^1]: Or, as some would say, before the birth of proper 'Western' philosophy at all, when Kant became philosopher *par excellence* and 'solved' philosophy for a time.
[^2]: Rationalism was not universally orthodox, but the influence of empiricism was largely relegated to British philosophy. As Kant would later attest, philosophical education in Germany was slanted entirely in favor of traditional rationalist philosophy.
[^3]: "I think, therefore I am". This statement itself is another example of *a priori* reasoning: it supposes knowledge in the self ('I') and one's own existence ('I am'), along with basic logic (A -> B) without any contigency on experience from the outer world.
[^4]: John Locke would also fall under this category, but admittedly I do not know enough about his philosophy to feel comfortable commenting on it.
[^5]: He is, after all, only the fourth most influential philosopher after Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
[^6]: For some intuition on this, sense data without understanding would only be nonsense (we would have no consciousness at all without any form of understanding on what an object *is* -- what is the appearance of a chair without us understanding that it is a chair?) And obviously, if we are devoid of sense data, we are unable to know objects exist at all. 
[^7]: This is an *extremely* simplified version of Kant's proof of causality. See the SEP article on Kant vs. Hume on causality for more information.
[^8]: Pre-socratic philsophy is a great example of this illusion. Although Democritus (and arguably, Zeno) were the most correct when it came to the empirical structure of the world, metaphysical theories that the world was made up of water, fire, air, and earth are famously completely incorrect according to our current understanding. Worse, they even sound plausible when you forget all scientific advances since the invention of physics and chemistry.
[^9]: I remember I was promised functioning robots and fusion by 2020 when I was a kid. Neither one materialized, although we did get a limited conversational AI in the form of ChatGPT (and before then, in GPT-3, and arguably GPT-2).
[^10]: If you feel you have a high accuracy on this, then feel free to play the stock market and start a fund.
[^11]: I'm still waiting for sentient AI and human travel to Jupiter, based on 2001: A Space Odyssey.
[^12]: Eliezer Yudkowsky, darling of the AI safety community, predicted that AGI could be built by 2008 with high probability, and even said that brains don't look that complicated compared to operating systems. I'm unsure where he got this idea, but it's a very silly one. https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/NBgpPaz5vYe3tH4ga/on-deference-and-yudkowsky-s-ai-risk-estimates
[^13]: Yudkowsky also predicted that neural networks were a waste of time, and that AI labs would build AGI by creating rules-following machines built logically and without much compute power. As it turns out, this speculation was also completely wrong (yet this view continues to inform his thoughts re: probability of AI doom, even though today's AI is completely detached from old-school notions of where AI progress would arise).
